AOP is not a replacement of OOP because objects are something very important for Java. But then there are certain things which you want to do in your application where AOP can help.

AOP stands for aspect oriented programming. But the question really is what we are trying to solve with AOP. The thing is, AOP complements OOP. So of course whatever we are doing, it's object oriented. But then if you use AOP it will solve certain your problems. And what I'm talking about the problem of cross-cutting concerns. Okay, now we have a new word. What is cross-cutting concerns. So when you write application, of course in your code you will be having multiple lines of code. Now when you're building an application like that, of course you want to focus more on the business logic. So basically whatever your client needs you will give that in a coding format. And in this application you'll be having a lot of codes and mostly the business logic. There are certain things which you have to do which your client not specifically mentioned here I need this. I need that certain things you do to protect the application and certain things you do for yourself. Maybe you want to check the performance of your software. maybe you want to log the files or the events. So every time you call a function, you want to log it somewhere. Maybe, let's say on some weird day, your application stopped working. Or maybe your customers are complaining about your application and you have no idea what's happening. So you can simply check a log file to see what is happening. Okay, so maybe we have to secure the application. Maybe what we want to maintain the log files. Maybe we want to handle the exceptions. And let's say we want to validate the inputs. Now of course you can do all those things inside your code.

We know that the controllers are basically responsible to accept the request and respond to the client. The actual processing happens in the service layer. let's say we have some business logic written in this particular files or in this particular methods. And now I want to maintain the log. So let's say every time someone calls save for the to the database, I want to maintain the log of it. Maybe I want to validate the input. So maybe whatever data is getting from the client I want to check if this data is correct or not. Or maybe I want to, uh, handle the exceptions. I will do it of course in this method. So I will just expand this method and I will start typing all the log codes. So maybe I will write the log statements here.

Maybe I will write the security statement here. I will write the validation for the code here. And maybe I want to handle the exception for this particular method. So all these things I'm doing in the same method, I mean, look at the business logic. It's only one method, one line. And look at all these lines.

See, in real world when you build application where you're doing a lot of processing, of course you'll be having a bigger code there for business logic, but still we have to write a lot of lines of code inside the method. Maybe you have to write multiple lines for logging, maybe one line, but then you have to do log here and maybe log at the end or before you return the value. If you are returning a value so you will do log two times. You have to maintain the security. You have to do validation. Of course it's not one line of code.Maybe you want to handle the exception. Apart from main business logic, other things are there inside your code and you will say, hey, what's wrong with that? I'm okay.

As a developer, I can write all the code. You have to make sure it works. But then you are missing one important thing. It's not always about writing a code. It's also about maintaining a code. It's also about reading a code. So let's say if you give this project to your colleague and maybe for your testing team, and when they are looking at your code, they will say, okay, I have all this code here. What is the main business logic? So they have to search for the business logic inside your method. Not a good idea, right? And it's also make your code a bit difficult to read. Then what solution? The solution is it's very simple. Just delete everything. No need to write anything inside this method. All right Okay, we are not solving the problem. We are running away from the problem. How do we solve this?

To solve this problem, what we can do is let's create another class, a separate class, and write all the codes there. So we are basically separating the concerns. But the amazing thing is if you talk about this concern let's say log. And even if you are creating a different class for that different method, I want to execute that method for every method, not just for update job I want to do it for get job, get all jobs, delete job. I want to do it for everything. Question arise how you are going to call that method. So even if you have a different method you have to basically call the methods right. Maybe call the log method. Call the security features right. So basically you have to call them. So one thing we are doing is we are basically separating a concern. And this concern is not specific to one method. This concern I'm talking about, the log security is for all the methods. So can we say they are cross-cutting concerns because it's not appearing at one location but multiple places. So those are your cross-cutting concerns. And then I still have to call it what if you don't have to call it.

And that's the entire topic. You don't have to call this method. This method should be called automatically and that's where your AOP comes into picture. Now you might be thinking we have to do a lot of configuration for this. Not exactly a lot of configuration. The concept is very easy. There are certain terms, which is tricky. So let's understand those things in the upcoming videos. But the idea here is you can you keep your cross-cutting concern in a separate class, separate methods, and someone should call it not you.

Let's create a separate file. So what concerns we are solving here is let's say for logging okay. And of course when you use AOP you can do it for the logging for the performance monitoring. Maybe you want to do it for exceptions and validations. So let's focus on few of the use cases. Not everything. And let's understand how AOP works.